[MLOB-7510] session-level documentation 2 (#37123)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/llm_observability/evaluations/custom_llm_as_a_judge_evaluations/prompt_templating.md

| `{{name}}` | Direct field (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.value}}` | Dot notation for nested fields (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.messages[0].content}}` | Array index (0-based) (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.messages[1,3].content}}` | Inclusive array range (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.messages[*].content}}` | Array wildcard (fan-out) (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.messages.content}}` | Implicit fan-out (same as `[*]`) (span scope) |
| `{{span_input}}`, `{{span_output}}` | Aliases for span input and output fields (span scope) |
| `{{*}}` | Entire payload as JSON (session, trace, or span scope) |

The autocomplete dropdown opens after you type `{{` and lists fields available on the selected sample.

## Session-scope syntax

Session-scope evaluations expose every trace in the [user session][1] under the `traces` array. Each trace includes its own `spans` array, so you can read across traces and spans in one prompt. Use `{{traces[...]}}` paths (and nested `{{traces[...].spans[...]}}` paths) to build session-level judges. The `{{span_input}}` and `{{span_output}}` aliases are not available in session scope.

> Session-level evaluations require spans to be tagged with a `session_id`. See [Tracking user sessions][1] to instrument your application. See [Session-Level Evaluations][2] for configuration, example prompts, and when to choose session scope over trace or span scope.

Reviewer: Two back-to-back "See..." sentences — combine into one:

```suggestion
Session-level evaluations require spans to be tagged with a `session_id`. See [Tracking user sessions][1] to instrument your application, and [Session-Level Evaluations][2] for configuration, example prompts, and guidance on when to choose session scope.
```

### Reference the whole session

```
{{traces}}    # JSON of every trace in the session (each trace includes its spans)
{{*}}         # Entire session payload as JSON, including top-level metadata
```

### Pick a trace or span by index

```
{{traces[0].spans[0].meta.input.value}}    # First span of the first trace
{{traces[*].spans[*].name}}                # Newline-joined names of every span in the session
{{traces[1].spans}}                        # JSON of every span in the second trace
```

### Filter spans by attribute

> `[field.path:value]` on `spans` keeps only the spans whose field at `field.path` equals `value`. Combine filters and deeper paths to extract inputs or outputs across the session. Filters fall back to an empty string when nothing matches.

Reviewer: Minor phrasing inconsistency with the equivalent trace-scope description (line 100), which says "Combine with deeper paths." Suggest aligning:

```suggestion
`[field.path:value]` on `spans` keeps only the spans whose field at `field.path` equals `value`. Combine with deeper paths to extract inputs or outputs across the session. Filters fall back to an empty string when nothing matches.
```

```
{{traces[0].spans[name:my-span].meta.input.value}}
{{traces[*].spans[meta.span.kind:llm].meta.output.value}}
{{traces[*].spans[meta.span.kind:tool].meta.input.parameters}}
```

### Fan-out across traces

Use `[*]` on `traces` or `spans` to fan out: values from every matching element are joined with newlines (`\n`), or serialized as JSON when the resolved values are objects.

```
{{traces[*].spans[meta.span.kind:llm].meta.input.messages[*].content}}
{{traces[*].spans[meta.span.kind:llm].meta.output.messages[*].content}}
```

## Trace-scope syntax

> Trace-scope evaluations expose every span in the trace under the `spans` array. Use `{{spans...}}` paths to read across spans. The `{{span_input}}` and `{{span_output}}` aliases are not available in trace scope. See [Trace-Level Evaluations][3] for configuration, example prompts, and when to choose trace scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trace-scope evaluations expose every span in the trace under the `spans` array. Use `{{spans...}}` paths to read across spans. The `{{span_input}}` and `{{span_output}}` aliases are not available in trace scope. See [Trace-Level Evaluations][3] for configuration, example prompts, and guidance on when to choose trace scope.
```

---
title: Prompt Templating
description: Reference for the templating used in custom LLM-as-a-judge evaluation prompts—variables, array operators, span and trace filters, session paths, and resolution rules.
further_reading:
- link: "/llm_observability/evaluations/custom_llm_as_a_judge_evaluations"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Custom LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluations"
- link: "/llm_observability/evaluations/custom_llm_as_a_judge_evaluations/session_level_evaluations"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Session-Level Evaluations"
- link: "/llm_observability/evaluations/custom_llm_as_a_judge_evaluations/trace_level_evaluations"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Trace-Level Evaluations"
---

> Custom LLM-as-a-judge prompts inject session, trace, or span data into the {{< ui >}}User{{< /ui >}} message by wrapping a field path in `{{ ... }}`. The System Prompt holds the static instructions to the LLM judge and does not resolve placeholders. The same syntax works in both the test pane and at evaluation time. Which paths are available depends on the evaluation scope you choose—session, trace, or span.

Reviewer: Minor — "Which paths are available depends on..." is a bit indirect. Suggestion:

```suggestion
Custom LLM-as-a-judge prompts inject session, trace, or span data into the {{< ui >}}User{{< /ui >}} message by wrapping a field path in `{{ ... }}`. The System Prompt holds the static instructions to the LLM judge and does not resolve placeholders. The same syntax works in both the test pane and at evaluation time. The available paths depend on the evaluation scope: session, trace, or span.
```

> Custom LLM-as-a-judge prompts inject session, trace, or span data into the {{< ui >}}User{{< /ui >}} message by wrapping a field path in `{{ ... }}`. The System Prompt holds the static instructions to the LLM judge and does not resolve placeholders. The same syntax works in both the test pane and at evaluation time. Which paths are available depends on the evaluation scope you choose—session, trace, or span.

Reviewer: Minor — "Which paths are available depends on..." is a bit indirect. Suggestion:

```suggestion
Custom LLM-as-a-judge prompts inject session, trace, or span data into the {{< ui >}}User{{< /ui >}} message by wrapping a field path in `{{ ... }}`. The System Prompt holds the static instructions to the LLM judge and does not resolve placeholders. The same syntax works in both the test pane and at evaluation time. The available paths depend on the evaluation scope: session, trace, or span.
```

## At a glance

> | Pattern | Description |

Reviewer: Worth a quick sanity check: the `(scope)` labels in parentheses add real value for ambiguous rows like `{{name}}` or `{{spans}}` (where the scope isn't obvious from the pattern). For self-evident rows like `{{traces[0].spans[0].meta.input.value}}`, the label is arguably noise. No change required — just flagging in case you want to slim the table down by dropping the labels from rows where the pattern already makes the scope obvious.

> | Pattern | Description |

Reviewer: Worth a quick sanity check: the `(scope)` labels in parentheses add real value for ambiguous rows like `{{name}}` or `{{spans}}` (where the scope isn't obvious from the pattern). For self-evident rows like `{{traces[0].spans[0].meta.input.value}}`, the label is arguably noise. I don't think it's a blocker, but could slim the table down by dropping the labels from rows where the pattern already makes the scope obvious.

|---|---|
| `{{traces}}` | Every trace in the session as JSON (session scope) |
| `{{traces[0].spans[0].meta.input.value}}` | First span of the first trace (session scope) |
| `{{traces[*].spans[*].name}}` | Fan-out across traces and spans (session scope) |
| `{{traces[meta.span.kind:llm].spans[*].meta.output.value}}` | Filter spans by attribute across a session (session scope) |
| `{{spans}}` | Every span in the trace as JSON (trace scope) |
| `{{spans[0].name}}` | Pick one span from a trace (trace scope) |
| `{{spans[name:my-span].meta.input.value}}` | Filter spans by attribute (trace scope) |
| `{{name}}` | Direct field (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.value}}` | Dot notation for nested fields (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.messages[0].content}}` | Array index (0-based) (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.messages[1,3].content}}` | Inclusive array range (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.messages[*].content}}` | Array wildcard (fan-out) (span scope) |
| `{{meta.input.messages.content}}` | Implicit fan-out (same as `[*]`) (span scope) |
| `{{span_input}}`, `{{span_output}}` | Span-scope aliases |

> | `{{*}}` | Entire session, trace, or span payload as JSON |

Reviewer: Two rows break the `Description (scope)` pattern used by the rest of the table — fixing for consistency.

```suggestion
| `{{span_input}}`, `{{span_output}}` | Aliases for span input and output fields (span scope) |
| `{{*}}` | Entire payload as JSON (session, trace, or span scope) |
```

> | `{{*}}` | Entire session, trace, or span payload as JSON |

Reviewer: Two rows break the `Description (scope)` pattern used by the rest of the table. Fixing for consistency.

```suggestion
| `{{span_input}}`, `{{span_output}}` | Aliases for span input and output fields (span scope) |
| `{{*}}` | Entire payload as JSON (session, trace, or span scope) |
```

The autocomplete dropdown opens after you type `{{` and lists fields available on the selected sample.

## Session-scope syntax

> Session-scope evaluations expose every trace in the [user session][1] under the `traces` array. Each trace includes its own `spans` array, so you can read across traces and spans in one prompt. Use `{{traces...}}` paths (and nested `{{traces...].spans...}}` paths) to build session-level judges. The `{{span_input}}` and `{{span_output}}` aliases are not available in session scope.

Reviewer: The bracket notation `{{traces...].spans...}}` has a mismatched `]` — there's no matching `[` opening it. Based on the examples in this section (e.g., `{{traces[0].spans[0].meta.input.value}}`), the intended shorthand is `{{traces[...].spans[...]}}`.

```suggestion
Session-scope evaluations expose every trace in the [user session][1] under the `traces` array. Each trace includes its own `spans` array, so you can read across traces and spans in one prompt. Use `{{traces[...]}}` paths (and nested `{{traces[...].spans[...]}}` paths) to build session-level judges. The `{{span_input}}` and `{{span_output}}` aliases are not available in session scope.
```

> Session-level evaluations require spans to be tagged with a `session_id`. See [Tracking user sessions][1] to instrument your application. A session is considered complete after **30 minutes** of inactivity (no new spans for that session, measured from the most recent span); the evaluation runs once at that point with every trace and span from the session. Spans that arrive more than 30 minutes after the previous span are not included. See [Session-Level Evaluations][2] for configuration, example prompts, and when to choose session scope over trace or span scope.

Reviewer: The session lifecycle mechanics (30-min timeout, late-span behavior) are conceptual details that belong on the Session-Level Evaluations page, not a syntax reference. Suggest trimming to just the prerequisite and the cross-ref:

```suggestion
Session-level evaluations require spans to be tagged with a `session_id`. See [Tracking user sessions][1] to instrument your application. See [Session-Level Evaluations][2] for configuration, example prompts, and when to choose session scope over trace or span scope.
```

### Reference the whole session

```
{{traces}}    # JSON of every trace in the session (each trace includes its spans)
{{*}}         # Entire session payload as JSON, including top-level metadata
```

### Pick a trace or span by index

```
{{traces[0].spans[0].meta.input.value}}    # First span of the first trace
{{traces[*].spans[*].name}}                # Newline-joined names of every span in the session
{{traces[1].spans}}                        # JSON of every span in the second trace
```

> ### Filter traces or spans by attribute

Reviewer: A few subsections have their explanatory text in the wrong place or missing:

1. **"Filter traces or spans by attribute"** (here) and **"Filter spans by attribute"** (trace scope, line 99) — the explanatory paragraph currently sits *after* the code block. Moving it before the code frames the examples before the reader hits them, consistent with how "Fan-out across traces" is structured.

2. **"Direct field paths"** (line 122) and **"Array access"** (line 131) — both go straight to code with no framing. Suggested lead-ins:
   - *Direct field paths*: "Reference any span field by its JSON path."
   - *Array access*: "Use bracket notation to index into, slice, or fan out over array fields."

The self-evident sections — "Reference the whole session/trace" and "Pick by index" — read fine without lead-ins.

```
{{traces[0].spans[name:my-span].meta.input.value}}
{{traces[*].spans[meta.span.kind:llm].meta.output.value}}
{{traces[meta.span.kind:llm].spans[*].meta.output.value}}

> {{traces[meta.span.kind:tool].spans[*].meta.input.parameters}}

Reviewer 2: these actually are not correct, the trace doesn't have attributes so you can only use indexes with traces

```

`[field.path:value]` on `traces` keeps only traces whose field at `field.path` equals `value`. The same filter syntax on `spans` (within a trace path) keeps only matching spans. Combine filters and deeper paths to extract inputs or outputs across the session. Filters fall back to an empty string when nothing matches.

### Fan-out across traces

> Use `[*]` on `traces` or `spans` the same way as in trace scope: values from every matching trace or span are collected and joined with newlines (`\n`), or serialized as JSON when the resolved values are objects.

Reviewer: "The same way as in trace scope" is a backwards reference — session-scope now appears *before* trace-scope, so the reader hasn't seen it yet. The sentence also immediately explains the behavior anyway, so the phrase adds nothing.

```suggestion
Use `[*]` on `traces` or `spans` to fan out: values from every matching element are joined with newlines (`\n`), or serialized as JSON when the resolved values are objects.
```

## Tips

- Type `{{` in the prompt editor to open the autocomplete dropdown. The list adapts to the scope (session, trace, or span) and to the sample selected on the right.

> - Pick a sample in the panel on the right—the sample session pane listing traces in the session (session scope), {{< ui >}}Spans in Selected Trace{{< /ui >}} (trace scope), or {{< ui >}}Filtered Spans{{< /ui >}} (span scope)—then click {{< ui >}}Test Evaluation{{< /ui >}} to preview how each placeholder resolves on real data before saving the configuration.

Reviewer: The session panel name is written as prose while the other two panel names in the same list use the `{{< ui >}}` shortcode. Can you verify the exact UI label for the session panel and wrap it consistently?

```suggestion
- Pick a sample in the panel on the right—{{< ui >}}Sample Session{{< /ui >}} listing traces in the session (session scope), {{< ui >}}Spans in Selected Trace{{< /ui >}} (trace scope), or {{< ui >}}Filtered Spans{{< /ui >}} (span scope)—then click {{< ui >}}Test Evaluation{{< /ui >}} to preview how each placeholder resolves on real data before saving the configuration.
```

- Use the three-dots menu on a sample's JSON view and select {{< ui >}}Add variable to message{{< /ui >}} to insert a field path into the prompt without typing it.
- Pass `{{*}}` when you want the LLM judge to see the full payload—useful for free-form prompts that decide for themselves which fields matter.

> - Prefer `{{traces}}` or targeted `{{traces...].spans...}}` paths for session judges when you need cross-turn context; use `{{spans}}` when a single trace is enough. See [Session-Level Evaluations][2] for scope guidance and example prompts.

Reviewer: Same mismatched bracket as line 42 — `{{traces...].spans...}}` should be `{{traces[...].spans[...]}}`.

```suggestion
- Prefer `{{traces}}` or targeted `{{traces[...].spans[...]}}` paths for session judges when you need cross-turn context; use `{{spans}}` when a single trace is enough. See [Session-Level Evaluations][2] for scope guidance and example prompts.
```

## Tips

> - Type `{{` in the prompt editor to open the autocomplete dropdown. The list adapts to the scope (session, trace, or span) and to the sample selected on the right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Type `{{` in the prompt editor to open the autocomplete dropdown. The list adapts to the scope (session, trace, or span) and to the sample selected.
```

> - Pick a sample in the panel on the right—{{< ui >}}Sample Session{{< /ui >}} listing traces in the session (session scope), {{< ui >}}Spans in Selected Trace{{< /ui >}} (trace scope), or {{< ui >}}Filtered Spans{{< /ui >}} (span scope)—then click {{< ui >}}Test Evaluation{{< /ui >}} to preview how each placeholder resolves on real data before saving the configuration.

Reviewer: This sentence is ~55 words and contains a dangling participial phrase — "{{< ui >}}Sample Session{{< /ui >}} listing traces in the session" reads awkwardly. Suggest splitting at the em dash and simplifying:

```suggestion
- Pick a sample in the panel on the right ({{< ui >}}Sample Session{{< /ui >}} for session scope, {{< ui >}}Spans in Selected Trace{{< /ui >}} for trace scope, or {{< ui >}}Filtered Spans{{< /ui >}} for span scope), then click {{< ui >}}Test Evaluation{{< /ui >}} to preview how each placeholder resolves on real data before saving.
```

- Use the three-dots menu on a sample's JSON view and select {{< ui >}}Add variable to message{{< /ui >}} to insert a field path into the prompt without typing it.
- Pass `{{*}}` when you want the LLM judge to see the full payload—useful for free-form prompts that decide for themselves which fields matter.

> - Prefer `{{traces}}` or targeted `{{traces[...].spans[...]}}` paths for session judges when you need cross-turn context; use `{{spans}}` when a single trace is enough. See [Session-Level Evaluations][2] for scope guidance and example prompts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use `{{traces}}` or targeted `{{traces[...].spans[...]}}` paths for session judges when you need cross-turn context; use `{{spans}}` when a single trace is enough. See [Session-Level Evaluations][2] for scope guidance and example prompts.
```

## Further Reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: /llm_observability/instrumentation/sdk/#tracking-user-sessions
[2]: /llm_observability/evaluations/custom_llm_as_a_judge_evaluations/session_level_evaluations

> [3]: /llm_observability/evaluations/custom_llm_as_a_judge_evaluations/trace_level_evaluations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[3]: /llm_observability/evaluations/custom_llm_as_a_judge_evaluations/trace_level_evaluations

```

Add a trailing newline — the file currently ends without one.
